The federal government’s official languages
programs not only ensure that services are delivered
to Canadians in both English and French.
They also protect the official language rights
of all public servants and promote the use of
both official languages in the workplace
in bilingual regions.
To accomplish this, the official languages programs
ensure that organizations comply with the
requirements of the Official Languages Act
and the Treasury Board’s official languages
policy instruments.
In this section you will learn to
identify manager and employee responsibilities
related to official languages and
recognize responsibilities regarding employee rights
related to language of work.
This section should take you
approximately 30 minutes to complete.
Did you know that the Official Languages Act
is based on the Constitution Act of 1867
and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
The Act has a quasi-constitutional status
that is recognized by the Canadian courts.
The Policy on Official Languages exists
to facilitate the effective implementation of
the Official Languages Act and its Official Languages
(Communications with and Services to the Public)
Regulations by government institutions.
The policy sets out the following expected results.
The public can communicate with
and receive services from federal government
institutions in English or French .
Employees can use the official language
of their choice and work in an environment
that is conducive to the use of
both official languages.
English-speaking and French-speaking
Canadians have equal opportunities for employment
and advancement in institutions,
taking into account the institutions’ mandate,
location, and the public they serve, and
appropriate governance structures, mechanisms,
and resources are in place to ensure coherent
management of the institution’s
official languages responsibilities.
Did you know that there is a difference
between a bilingual region and a
designated bilingual office?
Some offices are designated bilingual
for the purpose of communications
and services to the public even if
they are located in a unilingual region
for language-of-work purposes.
To identify such regions, consult
the Burolis database.
So let’s look at how the requirements apply
in bilingual or unilingual offices
for language-of-work purposes.
The Directive on Official Languages for
Communications and Services applies to
all communications involving the public
or public service employees.
Regarding communications with and services
to the public, managers of designated
bilingual offices are responsible for ensuring that:
communications and services in their offices
are actively offered in English and French;
the necessary capacity is in place to
communicate with and provide services to
members of the public in both official languages;
communications with and services to the public
from a designated office are in both official
languages or in the preferred language
of the recipient, if known;
when a designated office uses the media
to communicate with the public
(in circumstances other than those covered
by section 11 of the Official Languages Act),
communications to the public are in both official
languages or in the official language of the media
to reach its target audience.
The managerial responsibilities linked
to your institution’s obligations regarding
communications with public service employees
can vary depending on whether your office is
located in a unilingual region or a bilingual region.
To find out whether your organization is
located in a bilingual region,
you can refer to the List of Bilingual Regions
of Canada for Language-of-Work Purposes.
The Directive on Official Languages
for People Management supports the
Policy on Official Languages by identifying
requirements related to
the linguistic identification of a position,
the staffing of bilingual positions, and
the equitable participation of English-speaking and
French-speaking Canadians in federal institutions.
In bilingual regions, managers and
supervisors are responsible for:
providing employees with regularly and widely used
work instruments and electronic systems
in both official languages;
supervising employees in the official language
of the employee's choice when they occupy
bilingual or either/or positions;
supervising employees in the language of the
position when they occupy unilingual positions;
taking all necessary measures to enable employees
to use the official language of their choice
in meetings, regardless of the
linguistic identification of their position;
ensuring that training and professional development
is available to employees in the
official language of their choice;
ensuring that annual performance reviews and
appraisal ratings reflect compliance with the
Directive on Official Languages for
People Management in institutions for which
the Treasury Board is the employer; and
maintaining a work environment that allows
employees to use the official language
of their choice for both oral and written
communication purposes.
Note: Managers and supervisors who occupy
bilingual positions supervise each employee
in the language chosen by that employee
regardless of the linguistic identification
of the employee's position.
In unilingual regions (for language-of-work purposes),
managers and supervisors are responsible for
providing employees with regularly and widely used
work instruments and electronic systems
in both official languages, if they are required
to communicate or provide services to the public
or employees in English and French.
Using the Leadership Competencies Profile for
Official Languages can help individuals
self-assess their level of functionality
in their second language.
Managers in various federal organizations
are responsible for ensuring that the positions
they manage reflect the level of language
proficiency required to perform the duties
and tasks of the positions.
If you are a manager in an institution listed in
Schedules I or IV of the Financial Administration Act,
you can identify a language profile
using the following definitions.
English essential: The functions and duties
of the position will require only the use
of English (unilingual English position).
French essential: The functions and duties of
the position will require only the
use of French (unilingual French position).
Bilingual: The functions and duties of the position
will require the use of both English
and French (bilingual position).
Either/or position: The functions and duties
of the position will require only the use of
one official language, and the incumbent
chooses which language they will use.
The language of the position is the one chosen
by the incumbent for as long as they remain
in this position (either/or position).
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have its own ways
of doing things. Take a time out from the course
to consult the course tool box for a list of
the persons responsible for official languages and
the official languages champions in institutions
subject to the Official Languages Act.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select “Submit” when you are done.